sleepscoring/sleepscoring_gui_ReadMe.md, before:

## SleepScorer GUI — Multi‑trace + Multi‑video sleep scoring

SleepScorer is a fast, Qt-based application for interactive sleep scoring and time‑series review. It combines a high‑performance windowed renderer for multiple electrophysiology traces with one to three time‑synchronized videos, a global hypnogram overview, and an efficient click‑and‑drag labeling workflow.

This document explains:
- What the application does
- How to install and run it
- A complete tour of features and shortcuts
- Command‑line flags and data format
- Technical design and implementation details

---

### Quick start
Requirements:
- Python 3.9+ recommended
- pip packages: PySide6, pyqtgraph, opencv‑python, numpy

Install:
```bash
pip install PySide6 pyqtgraph opencv-python numpy
```

Run (examples):
```bash
# Load all *_t.npy/*_y.npy pairs from a folder
python -m sleepscoring.sleepscore_main --data_dir ./data

# Load explicit pairs and one video
python -m sleepscoring.sleepscore_main ^
  --data_files ./data/eeg_t.npy ./data/eeg_y.npy ./data/load_t.npy ./data/load_y.npy ^
  --video ./data/video.mp4 --frame_times ./data/frame_times.npy

# Load two and three videos (with separate frame-times)
python -m sleepscoring.sleepscore_main ^
  --data_dir ./data ^
  --video ./data/video.mp4 --frame_times ./data/frame_times.npy ^
  --video2 ./data/video2.mp4 --frame_times2 ./data/frame_times2.npy

python -m sleepscoring.sleepscore_main ^
  --data_dir ./data ^
  --video ./data/video.mp4 --frame_times ./data/frame_times.npy ^
  --video2 ./data/video2.mp4 --frame_times2 ./data/frame_times2.npy ^
  --video3 ./data/video3.mp4 --frame_times3 ./data/frame_times3.npy

# Load time series with matrix/raster plots (e.g., neural spike rasters)
python -m sleepscoring.sleepscore_main ^
  --data_dir ./data ^
  --matrix_timestamps ./data/spikes1_timestamps.npy ./data/spikes2_timestamps.npy ^
  --matrix_yvals ./data/spikes1_yvals.npy ./data/spikes2_yvals.npy ^
  --alpha_vals ./data/spikes1_alphas.npy ./data/spikes2_alphas.npy ^
  --matrix_colors "#FF5500" "#00AAFF"
```

---

### Data format
- Each time series is provided as a pair: `<name>_t.npy` (1‑D float seconds, monotonic) and `<name>_y.npy` (1‑D float values).
- You can:
  - Point the app to a directory with many pairs using `--data_dir`, or
  - Provide an ordered list of files using `--data_files` (any mix of `_t.npy` and `_y.npy` files). Pairs are matched by basename; row order follows first appearance in your list.
- Optional per‑series colors can be provided with `--colors`. Accepted formats: `#RRGGBB[AA]`, `0xRRGGBB`, or `R,G,B[,A]`.

Videos:
- Provide `--video/--frame_times` for the first video, `--video2/--frame_times2` for the second, and `--video3/--frame_times3` for the third.
- Frame times are 1‑D numpy arrays of timestamps (seconds) matching the video’s frames.
- A static image (`--image`) can be shown when only one video is present or for custom use.

Labels:
- CSV import/export uses the header `start_s,end_s,label` with rows specifying half‑open intervals `[start_s, end_s)`.

Matrix/Raster data:
- Matrix plots display discrete events as vertical lines in a raster format (e.g., neural spike rasters).
- Each matrix subplot requires:
  - `matrix_timestamps`: 1‑D array of event times (seconds, same timebase as time series)
  - `matrix_yvals`: 1‑D array of row indices (integers 0 to N-1) specifying which row each event belongs to
  - `alpha_vals` (optional): 1‑D array of alpha values (0.0 to 1.0) for each event
  - `matrix_colors`: hex color for each subplot (all events in a subplot share the same color)
- Events are rendered as vertical lines centered within their row, with configurable height and thickness.

---

### Command‑line flags
- `--data_dir PATH` — load all `<name>_t.npy` / `<name>_y.npy` pairs from a directory.
- `--data_files FILE...` — explicit ordered list of `.npy` files for multiple series.
- `--colors COLOR...` — optional colors matching series order (see format above).
- `--video, --frame_times` — main video and frame times.
- `--video2, --frame_times2` — second video and frame times.
- `--video3, --frame_times3` — third video and frame times.
- `--image` — static image (shown when a 2nd/3rd video is not used).
- `--fixed_scale` — disable Y auto‑scaling; initial per‑trace Y limits are set from robust percentiles (1–99%) with padding.
- `--low_profile_x` — hide X axis labels/ticks for all but the bottom trace; vertical grid lines are preserved on hidden axes.

Matrix viewer flags:
- `--matrix_timestamps FILE...` — list of .npy files with event timestamps for each matrix subplot.
- `--matrix_yvals FILE...` — list of .npy files with row indices (0 to N-1) for each event.
- `--alpha_vals FILE...` — optional list of .npy files with alpha values (0-1) for each event.
- `--matrix_colors COLOR...` — list of hex colors (#RRGGBB) for each matrix subplot.
- `--matrix_row_height FRAC` — optional height of each row as a fraction of available space (e.g., 0.02).

---

### UI tour
Left side:
- Multi‑trace panel: stacked plots showing each loaded time series. Plots are X‑linked.
- Click‑and‑drag inside any plot creates a selection region across all traces.
- Each plot has a vertical cursor line synchronized across traces.

Right side:
- Videos panel: up to three time‑synchronized videos stacked vertically, plus a per‑window cursor slider underneath the top video.
- An optional static image can be shown if fewer than three videos are loaded.
- Hypnogram overview at the bottom: shows full‑recording label spans and a translucent region indicating the current window.

Top:
- Window length (seconds) spinner; global navigator slider for paging through time.

Status bar:
- Displays window start/time span and current cursor time (with label state at cursor).

---

### Keyboard & mouse cheatsheet

Navigation and windowing
- Mouse wheel: page left/right one full window.
- Shift + wheel: smooth scroll window (fraction of window length; configurable).
- Ctrl + wheel: cursor scrub within the current window (like dragging the cursor slider).
- `[` `]` or PageUp/PageDown: page window left/right.
- Window spinner: change window length; the app keeps the cursor anchored proportionally.

Playback and frame stepping
- Space: toggle playback (loops within current window).
- View → Set Playback Speed…: choose 0.25× to 4× (default 1×).
- View → Frame Step Target → Video 1/2/3: pick which video to step.
- Left/Right arrow: step the selected video one frame back/forward (holding repeats).

Selection & labeling
- Click‑drag in any plot: create/update selection. Drag handles to extend or refine.
- While a selection is active, press a label key:
  - `w` Wake
  - `q` Quiet‑Wake
  - `b` Brief‑Arousal
  - `2` NREM‑light
  - `1` NREM
  - `r` REM
  - `t` Transition‑to‑REM
  - `a` Artifact
  - `u` unclear
  - `o` ON
  - `f` OFF
  - `s` spindle
- `0`: Clear any labels in the selected range (splits existing intervals as needed).
- Backspace (Edit → Delete last label): removes the most recently ending label.
- Labels that overlap or are directly adjacent and have the same state are merged automatically into a single epoch.

Zoom & axes
- Ctrl + 1 / Ctrl + 2: zoom Y‑axis in/out on the hovered plot.
- View → Y‑Axis Controls… (Ctrl+D): per‑trace autorange toggle and min/max input.
- `z`: toggle hypnogram zoom (zoom to window ± padding vs. full extent).
- `h`: toggle hypnogram visibility (frees vertical space for videos).

Video controls
- View → Adjust Secondary Videos Size…: slider to reduce/enlarge Video 1’s share so Video 2/3 gain space (live preview).
- View → Show Video 1/2/3 (checkable) or:
  - Ctrl+Shift+1 / Ctrl+Shift+2 / Ctrl+Shift+3 to toggle each video.
- Videos auto‑scale to their label sizes; resizing the splitter re‑scales the frames.

Trace visibility
- View → Show/Hide Traces…: toggle visibility of any trace.
- Hidden traces disappear completely and the remaining traces expand to occupy the space. X‑linking remains intact.

Matrix viewer controls
- View → Matrix Event Height…: adjust the vertical extent of event lines (0.1–0.5, distance from row center). Default is 0.4 (lines span 80% of row height).
- View → Matrix Event Thickness…: adjust the pen width of event lines in pixels (1–10). Default is 2.
- Matrix plots show only min/max Y tick labels and have no horizontal grid lines for a clean raster appearance.

Import/Export labels
- File → Load Labels… reads CSV with header `start_s,end_s,label`.
- File → Export Labels… writes the same format (values formatted to 6 decimals).

---

### Tips and recommended workflow
1. Set window length for your scoring resolution (e.g., 10–30 s).
2. Page `[ ]` or Shift+wheel to find regions of interest.
3. Click‑drag to select an epoch; press a label key. Repeat across the recording.
4. Use `0` to clear labels for re‑scoring specific regions.
5. Use the hypnogram to verify global dynamics; toggle `z` to zoom the overview.
6. Adjust Y scales per trace via Ctrl+D (or use `--fixed_scale` at launch).
7. If reviewing behavior videos, step the selected video frame‑by‑frame with Left/Right. Use the frame step target menu to choose which video to step.

---

### Technical design

Rendering and decimation
- Each trace is rendered in a `pyqtgraph.PlotItem` using a custom windowed decimator:
  - `segment_for_window()` returns either raw samples (if under a threshold) or a peak‑preserving min/max per time bin (interleaved at bin centers) to preserve spikes/peaks.
  - Rendering budget per plot is adaptive to pixel width to ensure interactivity.
- A custom `SelectableViewBox` disables the stock pan/zoom behavior and emits:
  - Drag start/update/finish signals (for selection)
  - Wheel events split into three intents:
    - Paging (no modifier)
    - Smooth scrolling (Shift)
    - Cursor scrubbing (Ctrl)
- `HoverablePlotItem` augments plots with hover enter/leave to target Y‑zoom on the active plot.

Labeling model
- Labels are stored as a sorted list of dicts `{start, end, label}` (seconds).
- Adding a label:
  - Overlapping existing intervals are split so the new label overwrites the selected span only.
  - After insertion, adjacent/overlapping intervals with the same label are merged.
- Clearing (`0`) removes any overlapping parts by splitting and discarding overlaps.
- All label regions are drawn across every trace as translucent `LinearRegionItem`s.
- The hypnogram overview shows the same label spans collapsed to a single row with a translucent “current window” region.

Videos and threading
- Each video is handled by a `VideoWorker` in its own `QThread`, with a small LRU frame cache. Frames are requested by nearest frame index to the current cursor time.
- The main window’s `_set_cursor_time()` requests frames from any loaded videos; scaling is applied to fit inside their `QLabel`s.
- Frame stepping uses the selected video’s frame times to pick the nearest index and move to the previous/next index. This accommodates different frame rates across videos.

Layout and sizing
- Left plot spines (Y axes) are aligned by measuring axis widths and applying the maximum using `setWidth()`.
- `--low_profile_x` keeps vertical grid lines for upper plots while hiding axis labels/ticks so only the bottom plot shows time tick labels.
- The videos are grouped in a dedicated right‑panel container with its own vertical layout. Stretches are applied only to video rows so you can reallocate space between Video 1 vs Videos 2/3 without fighting other controls.
- Traces are placed in a `GraphicsLayoutWidget`; when you hide a trace, the layout is rebuilt only with visible plots and X‑linking is re‑established.

Matrix viewer rendering
- Matrix/raster plots display discrete events as vertical line segments.
- Each event is drawn as a vertical line at its timestamp, spanning from `(row + 0.5 - height)` to `(row + 0.5 + height)` where height is the configurable event height.
- For performance, events are grouped by quantized alpha levels (11 levels) and rendered as batched line segments using `PlotDataItem` with `connect='pairs'`.
- Only events within the current time window are rendered, using binary search on sorted timestamps.
- Downsampling is applied if too many events are visible (>10,000) to maintain responsiveness.
- Matrix plots are X‑linked with time series plots and share the same cursor, selection, and labeling system.

Performance notes
- OpenGL is enabled in pyqtgraph config when available; antialiasing is off for speed.
- The decimation budget is bounded per plot and scales with plot pixel width.
- Long‑duration datasets (hours) remain responsive due to windowed rendering.

---

### Troubleshooting
- No videos appear:
  - Ensure `opencv-python` is installed and the paths to `--video` and `--frame_times` exist.
  - Verify `frame_times.npy` is 1‑D and aligned with the video frames.
- X grid lines missing (low profile mode):
  - The app retains vertical grid lines by keeping a minimal bottom axis per row with hidden tick text. If you manually change plot styles, keep axes alive to preserve grids.
- Labels don’t export:
  - Ensure you have created at least one label. Export requires at least one interval.

---

### Extensibility
- Add new label keys or colors by editing `keymap` and `label_colors` where the main window is constructed.
- The labeling and rendering code paths are modular:
  - Label management: `_add_new_label`, `_clear_labels_in_range`, `_merge_adjacent_same_labels`, `_redraw_all_labels`, `_redraw_hypnogram_labels`.
  - Rendering pipeline: `_apply_x_range`, `_refresh_curves`, `segment_for_window`.
  - Video plumbing: `VideoWorker`, `_on_frame_ready`/`_on_frame2_ready`/`_on_frame3_ready`.

---

### License and citation
This tool is provided as part of your lab’s internal tooling. If you publish results scored with this application, please include an appropriate acknowledgment of the SleepScorer GUI.

For questions or contributions, open an issue or send a patch in the repository containing `sleepscoring/sleepscore_main.py`.

Commit message:

major improvements to sleepscore matrix plotting and height control

sleepscoring/sleepscoring_gui_ReadMe.md, after:

## SleepScorer GUI — Multi‑trace + Multi‑video sleep scoring

SleepScorer is a fast, Qt-based application for interactive sleep scoring and time‑series review. It combines a high‑performance windowed renderer for multiple electrophysiology traces with one to three time‑synchronized videos, a global hypnogram overview, and an efficient click‑and‑drag labeling workflow.

This document explains:
- What the application does
- How to install and run it
- A complete tour of features and shortcuts
- Command‑line flags and data format
- Technical design and implementation details

---

### Quick start
Requirements:
- Python 3.9+ recommended
- pip packages: PySide6, pyqtgraph, opencv‑python, numpy

Install:
```bash
pip install PySide6 pyqtgraph opencv-python numpy
```

Run (examples):
```bash
# Load all *_t.npy/*_y.npy pairs from a folder
python -m sleepscoring.sleepscore_main --data_dir ./data

# Load explicit pairs and one video
python -m sleepscoring.sleepscore_main ^
  --data_files ./data/eeg_t.npy ./data/eeg_y.npy ./data/load_t.npy ./data/load_y.npy ^
  --video ./data/video.mp4 --frame_times ./data/frame_times.npy

# Load two and three videos (with separate frame-times)
python -m sleepscoring.sleepscore_main ^
  --data_dir ./data ^
  --video ./data/video.mp4 --frame_times ./data/frame_times.npy ^
  --video2 ./data/video2.mp4 --frame_times2 ./data/frame_times2.npy

python -m sleepscoring.sleepscore_main ^
  --data_dir ./data ^
  --video ./data/video.mp4 --frame_times ./data/frame_times.npy ^
  --video2 ./data/video2.mp4 --frame_times2 ./data/frame_times2.npy ^
  --video3 ./data/video3.mp4 --frame_times3 ./data/frame_times3.npy

# Load time series with matrix/raster plots (e.g., neural spike rasters)
python -m sleepscoring.sleepscore_main ^
  --data_dir ./data ^
  --matrix_timestamps ./data/spikes1_timestamps.npy ./data/spikes2_timestamps.npy ^
  --matrix_yvals ./data/spikes1_yvals.npy ./data/spikes2_yvals.npy ^
  --alpha_vals ./data/spikes1_alphas.npy ./data/spikes2_alphas.npy ^
  --matrix_colors "#FF5500" "#00AAFF"
```

---

### Data format
- Each time series is provided as a pair: `<name>_t.npy` (1‑D float seconds, monotonic) and `<name>_y.npy` (1‑D float values).
- You can:
  - Point the app to a directory with many pairs using `--data_dir`, or
  - Provide an ordered list of files using `--data_files` (any mix of `_t.npy` and `_y.npy` files). Pairs are matched by basename; row order follows first appearance in your list.
- Optional per‑series colors can be provided with `--colors`. Accepted formats: `#RRGGBB[AA]`, `0xRRGGBB`, or `R,G,B[,A]`.

Videos:
- Provide `--video/--frame_times` for the first video, `--video2/--frame_times2` for the second, and `--video3/--frame_times3` for the third.
- Frame times are 1‑D numpy arrays of timestamps (seconds) matching the video’s frames.
- A static image (`--image`) can be shown when only one video is present or for custom use.

Labels:
- CSV import/export uses the header `start_s,end_s,label` with rows specifying half‑open intervals `[start_s, end_s)`.

Matrix/Raster data:
- Matrix plots display discrete events as vertical lines in a raster format (e.g., neural spike rasters).
- Each matrix subplot requires:
  - `matrix_timestamps`: 1‑D array of event times (seconds, same timebase as time series)
  - `matrix_yvals`: 1‑D array of row indices (integers 0 to N-1) specifying which row each event belongs to
  - `alpha_vals` (optional): 1‑D array of alpha values (0.0 to 1.0) for each event
  - `matrix_colors`: hex color for each subplot (all events in a subplot share the same color)
- Events are rendered as vertical lines centered within their row, with configurable height and thickness.

---

### Command‑line flags
- `--data_dir PATH` — load all `<name>_t.npy` / `<name>_y.npy` pairs from a directory.
- `--data_files FILE...` — explicit ordered list of `.npy` files for multiple series.
- `--colors COLOR...` — optional colors matching series order (see format above).
- `--video, --frame_times` — main video and frame times.
- `--video2, --frame_times2` — second video and frame times.
- `--video3, --frame_times3` — third video and frame times.
- `--image` — static image (shown when a 2nd/3rd video is not used).
- `--fixed_scale` — disable Y auto‑scaling; initial per‑trace Y limits are set from robust percentiles (1–99%) with padding.
- `--low_profile_x` — hide X axis labels/ticks for all but the bottom trace; vertical grid lines are preserved on hidden axes.

Matrix viewer flags:
- `--matrix_timestamps FILE...` — list of .npy files with event timestamps for each matrix subplot.
- `--matrix_yvals FILE...` — list of .npy files with row indices (0 to N-1) for each event.
- `--alpha_vals FILE...` — optional list of .npy files with alpha values (0-1) for each event.
- `--matrix_colors COLOR...` — list of hex colors (#RRGGBB) for each matrix subplot.

---

### UI tour
Left side:
- Multi‑trace panel: stacked plots showing each loaded time series. Plots are X‑linked.
- Click‑and‑drag inside any plot creates a selection region across all traces.
- Each plot has a vertical cursor line synchronized across traces.

Right side:
- Videos panel: up to three time‑synchronized videos stacked vertically, plus a per‑window cursor slider underneath the top video.
- An optional static image can be shown if fewer than three videos are loaded.
- Hypnogram overview at the bottom: shows full‑recording label spans and a translucent region indicating the current window.

Top:
- Window length (seconds) spinner; global navigator slider for paging through time.

Status bar:
- Displays window start/time span and current cursor time (with label state at cursor).

---

### Keyboard & mouse cheatsheet

Navigation and windowing
- Mouse wheel: page left/right one full window.
- Shift + wheel: smooth scroll window (fraction of window length; configurable).
- Ctrl + wheel: cursor scrub within the current window (like dragging the cursor slider).
- `[` `]` or PageUp/PageDown: page window left/right.
- Window spinner: change window length; the app keeps the cursor anchored proportionally.

Playback and frame stepping
- Space: toggle playback (loops within current window).
- View → Set Playback Speed…: choose 0.25× to 4× (default 1×).
- View → Frame Step Target → Video 1/2/3: pick which video to step.
- Left/Right arrow: step the selected video one frame back/forward (holding repeats).

Selection & labeling
- Click‑drag in any plot: create/update selection. Drag handles to extend or refine.
- While a selection is active, press a label key:
  - `w` Wake
  - `q` Quiet‑Wake
  - `b` Brief‑Arousal
  - `2` NREM‑light
  - `1` NREM
  - `r` REM
  - `t` Transition‑to‑REM
  - `a` Artifact
  - `u` unclear
  - `o` ON
  - `f` OFF
  - `s` spindle
- `0`: Clear any labels in the selected range (splits existing intervals as needed).
- Backspace (Edit → Delete last label): removes the most recently ending label.
- Labels that overlap or are directly adjacent and have the same state are merged automatically into a single epoch.

Zoom & axes
- Ctrl + 1 / Ctrl + 2: zoom Y‑axis in/out on the hovered plot.
- View → Y‑Axis Controls… (Ctrl+D): per‑trace autorange toggle and min/max input.
- `z`: toggle hypnogram zoom (zoom to window ± padding vs. full extent).
- `h`: toggle hypnogram visibility (frees vertical space for videos).

Video controls
- View → Adjust Secondary Videos Size…: slider to reduce/enlarge Video 1’s share so Video 2/3 gain space (live preview).
- View → Show Video 1/2/3 (checkable) or:
  - Ctrl+Shift+1 / Ctrl+Shift+2 / Ctrl+Shift+3 to toggle each video.
- Videos auto‑scale to their label sizes; resizing the splitter re‑scales the frames.

Trace visibility
- View → Show/Hide Traces…: toggle visibility of any trace.
- Hidden traces disappear completely and the remaining traces expand to occupy the space. X‑linking remains intact.

Matrix viewer controls
- View → Proportional Matrix Plots (Ctrl+Shift+M): toggle proportional sizing of matrix plots based on their row count. When enabled, a plot with 20 rows will be twice as tall as one with 10 rows.
- View → Increase Matrix Share (Ctrl+Shift+,): increase the vertical space allocated to matrix plots by ~5%. No upper bound—you can keep increasing as needed.
- View → Decrease Matrix Share (Ctrl+Shift+.): decrease the vertical space allocated to matrix plots by ~5%. No lower bound—you can keep decreasing as needed.
- View → Adjust Matrix Brightness…: slider to adjust the brightness/visibility of matrix event lines (0.2–3.0). Default is 1.0; higher values make events more visible.
- View → Matrix Event Height…: adjust the vertical extent of event lines (0.1–0.5, distance from row center). Default is 0.4 (lines span 80% of row height).
- View → Matrix Event Thickness…: adjust the pen width of event lines in pixels (1–10). Default is 2.
- Matrix plots show only min/max Y tick labels and have no horizontal grid lines for a clean raster appearance.

Plot height customization
- View → Plot Heights Control Board… (Ctrl+H): opens a dialog with sliders for every visible subplot (time series and matrix). Adjust individual plot heights from 0.1× to 5.0× the default. When one plot is made taller, the others proportionally shrink. Use "Reset All to Default" to restore all heights to 1.0×.

Import/Export labels
- File → Load Labels… reads CSV with header `start_s,end_s,label`.
- File → Export Labels… writes the same format (values formatted to 6 decimals).

---

### Tips and recommended workflow
1. Set window length for your scoring resolution (e.g., 10–30 s).
2. Page `[ ]` or Shift+wheel to find regions of interest.
3. Click‑drag to select an epoch; press a label key. Repeat across the recording.
4. Use `0` to clear labels for re‑scoring specific regions.
5. Use the hypnogram to verify global dynamics; toggle `z` to zoom the overview.
6. Adjust Y scales per trace via Ctrl+D (or use `--fixed_scale` at launch).
7. If reviewing behavior videos, step the selected video frame‑by‑frame with Left/Right. Use the frame step target menu to choose which video to step.

---

### Technical design

Rendering and decimation
- Each trace is rendered in a `pyqtgraph.PlotItem` using a custom windowed decimator:
  - `segment_for_window()` returns either raw samples (if under a threshold) or a peak‑preserving min/max per time bin (interleaved at bin centers) to preserve spikes/peaks.
  - Rendering budget per plot is adaptive to pixel width to ensure interactivity.
- A custom `SelectableViewBox` disables the stock pan/zoom behavior and emits:
  - Drag start/update/finish signals (for selection)
  - Wheel events split into three intents:
    - Paging (no modifier)
    - Smooth scrolling (Shift)
    - Cursor scrubbing (Ctrl)
- `HoverablePlotItem` augments plots with hover enter/leave to target Y‑zoom on the active plot.

Labeling model
- Labels are stored as a sorted list of dicts `{start, end, label}` (seconds).
- Adding a label:
  - Overlapping existing intervals are split so the new label overwrites the selected span only.
  - After insertion, adjacent/overlapping intervals with the same label are merged.
- Clearing (`0`) removes any overlapping parts by splitting and discarding overlaps.
- All label regions are drawn across every trace as translucent `LinearRegionItem`s.
- The hypnogram overview shows the same label spans collapsed to a single row with a translucent “current window” region.

Videos and threading
- Each video is handled by a `VideoWorker` in its own `QThread`, with a small LRU frame cache. Frames are requested by nearest frame index to the current cursor time.
- The main window’s `_set_cursor_time()` requests frames from any loaded videos; scaling is applied to fit inside their `QLabel`s.
- Frame stepping uses the selected video’s frame times to pick the nearest index and move to the previous/next index. This accommodates different frame rates across videos.

Layout and sizing
- Left plot spines (Y axes) are aligned by measuring axis widths and applying the maximum using `setWidth()`.
- `--low_profile_x` keeps vertical grid lines for upper plots while hiding axis labels/ticks so only the bottom plot shows time tick labels.
- The videos are grouped in a dedicated right‑panel container with its own vertical layout. Stretches are applied only to video rows so you can reallocate space between Video 1 vs Videos 2/3 without fighting other controls.
- Traces are placed in a `GraphicsLayoutWidget`; when you hide a trace, the layout is rebuilt only with visible plots and X‑linking is re‑established.
- Individual plot heights can be customized via the Plot Heights Control Board (Ctrl+H). Each plot has a height factor (default 1.0×) that scales from 0.1× to 5.0×. Heights are applied using `setRowPreferredHeight` and `setRowStretchFactor` to achieve proportional sizing.

Matrix viewer rendering
- Matrix/raster plots display discrete events as vertical line segments.
- Each event is drawn as a vertical line at its timestamp, spanning from `(row + 0.5 - height)` to `(row + 0.5 + height)` where height is the configurable event height.
- Alpha values from the data are multiplied by a brightness factor (default 1.0, adjustable 0.2–3.0) before rendering.
- For performance, events are grouped by quantized alpha levels (11 levels) and rendered as batched line segments using `PlotDataItem` with `connect='pairs'`.
- Only events within the current time window are rendered, using binary search on sorted timestamps.
- Downsampling is applied if too many events are visible (>10,000) to maintain responsiveness.
- Matrix plots are X‑linked with time series plots and share the same cursor, selection, and labeling system.
- Proportional sizing mode adjusts row heights based on matrix row counts; the matrix share boost adjusts the relative space between time series and matrix plots (no bounds, allowing extreme customization).
- Individual plot heights can be further customized via the Plot Heights Control Board, which interacts with matrix proportional sizing when enabled.

Performance notes
- OpenGL is enabled in pyqtgraph config when available; antialiasing is off for speed.
- The decimation budget is bounded per plot and scales with plot pixel width.
- Long‑duration datasets (hours) remain responsive due to windowed rendering.

---

### Troubleshooting
- No videos appear:
  - Ensure `opencv-python` is installed and the paths to `--video` and `--frame_times` exist.
  - Verify `frame_times.npy` is 1‑D and aligned with the video frames.
- X grid lines missing (low profile mode):
  - The app retains vertical grid lines by keeping a minimal bottom axis per row with hidden tick text. If you manually change plot styles, keep axes alive to preserve grids.
- Labels don’t export:
  - Ensure you have created at least one label. Export requires at least one interval.

---

### Extensibility
- Add new label keys or colors by editing `keymap` and `label_colors` where the main window is constructed.
- The labeling and rendering code paths are modular:
  - Label management: `_add_new_label`, `_clear_labels_in_range`, `_merge_adjacent_same_labels`, `_redraw_all_labels`, `_redraw_hypnogram_labels`.
  - Rendering pipeline: `_apply_x_range`, `_refresh_curves`, `segment_for_window`.
  - Video plumbing: `VideoWorker`, `_on_frame_ready`/`_on_frame2_ready`/`_on_frame3_ready`.

---

### License and citation
This tool is provided as part of your lab’s internal tooling. If you publish results scored with this application, please include an appropriate acknowledgment of the SleepScorer GUI.

For questions or contributions, open an issue or send a patch in the repository containing `sleepscoring/sleepscore_main.py`.
